---
layout: post
categories: ['0', '1', 'constants', 'arithmetic']
---

$$ 0 $$, it's a lovely number. It's one of the most important constants in mathematics.

"Constants" are weird. Finding a formal definition of "mathematical constant" is tricky.
As I understand it, constants are interesting numbers (and by numbers, I mean real[^1]
quantities, not variables like $$ x $$ and $$ y $$) in mathematics that can be formally 
defined and contribute significantly to the understanding and/or study of some field or
fields of mathematics. Oh, but that's just a bunch of words. Without some concrete
examples, who  really cares?

So, this brings me back to $$ 0 $$. What a weird number. Can you think of another number
that can be multiplied by any number in the universe and equal itself? No? Neither can I.
How about another number that can be added to any number in the universe and equal that
number? Once again, I suspect that answer is no.

And of course, you can't talk about $$ 0 $$ without mentioning its neighbor, $$ 1 $$.
In fact, $$ 1 $$ seems like $$ 0 $$'s perfect partner in crime. $$ 1 $$ can be multiplied
by any number in the universe and equal that number. Adding it to any number results is
the next number in the number line, its "successor". $$ 1 $$ is the "unit"; it defines
the building block of all quantities.

In the last 2 paragraphs, I've really only said four simple things[^2]:
* **Rule 1**: $$ 0 $$ plus a number equals the number: $$ 0 + x = x $$
* **Rule 2**: $$ 0 $$ times a number equals zero: $$ 0 \cdot x = 0 $$
* **Rule 3**: $$ 1 $$ plus a number equals the number's successor: $$ 1 + x = S(x) $$
* **Rule 4**: $$ 1 $$ times a number equals the number: $$ 1 \cdot x = x $$

In rule 3, I used some weird syntax: $$ S(x) $$. $$ S $$ is called the "successor
function", so $$ S(x) $$ really just means "the successor of $$ x $$". In other words, if
$$ x $$ is $$ 1 $$, then $$ S(x) = S(1) = 2 $$; if $$ x $$ is $$ 2 $$ then $$ S(x) = S(2)
= 3 $$[^3].

The successor function allows for a couple more interesting rules:
* **Rule 5**: The sum of one number and the successor of another equals the successor of their sum:
  $$ a + S(b) = S(a + b) $$
* **Rule 6**: The product of one number and the successor of another equals the first number added to
  their product: $$ a \cdot S(b) = a + (a \cdot b) $$
   
These rules are a bit of a mouthful, but just plug in example numbers for $$ a $$ and
$$ b $$, and you'll be surprised how simple they really are.

If $$ a $$ is $$ 2 $$ and $$ b $$ is $$ 3 $$, then rule 5 says:

$$ \begin{align*} 
   a + S(b) &= 2 + S(3)\\
            &= 2 + 4\\
            &= 6\\
            &= S(5)\\
            &= S(2 + 3)\\
            &= S(a + b)\\
   \end{align*}$$

and rule 6 says:

$$ \begin{align*} 
   a \cdot S(b) &= 2 \cdot S(3)\\ 
                &= 2 \cdot 4\\
                &= 8\\ 
                &= 2 + 6\\ 
                &= 2 + (2 \cdot 3)\\ 
                &= a + (a \cdot b)\\ 
   \end{align*}$$
   
Why did I spend all this time talking about a bunch of somewhat obvious rules that
can be built upon the properties of $$ 0 $$ and $$ 1 $$? Well, it turns out that these
rules are all you need for arithmetic. Things like the distributive property
($$ a \cdot (x + y) = a \cdot x + a \cdot y $$) follow directly from these rules[^4].
Subtraction and division can only be defined in terms of these rules. These rules are
the reason there are "correct" answers to math problems.

This means $$ 0 $$ and $$ 1 $$ are the constants at the basis of arithmetic. Why should
you care? It's not like you'll ever have trouble memorizing your one-times table. Maybe
$$ 7 $$ is a scary number to you, maybe it's lucky. Well, at its most basic, $$ 7 $$ can
only be defined as a number of successions (additions of $$ 1 $$) from $$ 0 $$. In other
words, all the other numbers can only exist and have their unique properties because of
$$ 0 $$ and $$ 1 $$.

Maybe we should all take a moment to thank $$ 0 $$ and $$ 1 $$ for enabling us to
understand math.

---

[^1]: Or imaginary, but let's ignore that for a bit
[^2]: This is a less formal version of the [Peano Axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peano_axioms)
[^3]: "2" and "3" are really just symbols for the successors of "1" and "2", respectively.
      It's just as valid (but maybe less convenient) to write them as "10" and "11"
      (binary) or "II" and "III" (roman numerals).
      
[^4]: Here's the inductive proof of the distributive property:

      If $$ y = 0 $$ then
      
      $$ \begin{align*}
         a \cdot (x + y) &= a \cdot (x + 0)\\
                         &= a \cdot x\\
                         &= a \cdot x + 0 && \text{(rule 1)}\\
                         &= a \cdot x + a \cdot 0 && \text{(rule 2)}\\
                         &= a \cdot x + a \cdot y\\
         \end{align*}$$
         
      Now, let's assume that the distributive property holds for some $$ y = N $$. If
      $$ y = S(N) $$ (the successor of N), then
      
      $$ \begin{align*}
         a \cdot (x + y) &= a \cdot (x + S(N))\\
                         &= a \cdot S(x + N) && \text{(rule 5)}\\
                         &= a + (a \cdot (x + N)) && \text{(rule 6)}\\
                         &= a + (a \cdot x + a \cdot N) && \text{(the assumption)}\\
                         &= a + a \cdot x + a \cdot N\\
                         &= a \cdot x + (a + a \cdot N)\\
                         &= a \cdot x + a \cdot S(N) && \text{(rule 6)}\\
                         &= a \cdot x + a \cdot y\\
         \end{align*}$$
         
      Now we have two facts:
      1. The distributive property holds for $$ y = 0 $$
      2. If the distributive property holds for $$ y = N $$, then it also holds for
         $$ y = S(N) $$
         
      Since we can create any $$ N $$ by repeatedly applying the successor function to $$ 0 $$
      (e.g. $$ 3 = S(S(S(0))) $$), then these two facts prove the distributive property!